Good afternoon,
everybody. Thanks for being here.
On Saturday night,
as you all know,
an act of violence occurred at a
gathering that symbolizes something
fundamental to our system of government.
>> From The New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams,
and this is The Daily. Today, the
Department of Justice filed three
federal charges in United States
District Court against Cole Thomas
Allen.
>> [music]
>> On Monday, the man accused of storming
the White House Correspondents Dinner
with multiple weapons was charged in
federal court in Washington, D.C.
Violence has no place
in civic [music] life. It cannot and
will not be used to disrupt democratic
institutions
or intimidate those who serve them, and
it certainly cannot continue to be used
against the President of the United
States. Today,
Devlin Barrett explains what we're
learning about the suspect, [music] his
plan to target the President, and
whether this entire event should
ultimately be thought of
>> [music]
>> as a security failure or success.
[music]
>> It's Tuesday, April 28th.
Devlin Barrett, welcome back to The
Daily. Thanks for having me. So, we've
been getting some clarity on who the
shooter was who attempted to storm the
White House Correspondents Dinner on
Saturday.
Details have been emerging since this
happened, but Devlin, you cover the
Justice Department for the Times. Tell
us what we learned on Monday.
So, [snorts] on Monday, there were a few
key developments. First, the suspect,
Cole Allen, was formally charged in a
criminal complaint. He was charged with
attempting to assassinate the President.
That wasn't the only charge, but it's
the most important charge by far
because that charge carries a potential
life sentence.
The other two charges in the criminal
complaint are transportation of a
firearm over interstate commerce, and
that's a reference to him allegedly
bringing weapons across country.
>> [snorts]
>> And discharge of a firearm during a
crime of violence.
That charge basically means that he
fired the weapon while committing a
crime. And one thing that officials have
emphasized since this happened is that
the first round of charges aren't going
to be their last word on this. There may
be more charges added as they understand
the evidence better and as they have a
better grasp on what exactly they think
happened.
Let's talk for a moment about the
suspect. At this point, what have we
learned about his background?
So, once this happened, obviously, we've
been trying to figure out as much as we
can about his background, about his
life. He's 31. He's from Torrance,
California, and he's, by all accounts, a
smart guy. He has a a master's in
computer science. He went to Caltech,
which is not an easy school to get into.
We know that he, you know, was raised in
the Protestant church, and his father
was a church elder. And in talking to
people who know him, and talked to some
of his former students because he worked
as a tutor for a good bit of time, they
all describe him as nice, cheerful, a
bit of a nerd, um,
and all of them that have been
interviewed by reporters expressed shock
and surprise that the person they knew
as this tutor and academic would do
anything like this.
We also know that he left behind a kind
of apology note, an explanation note to
his friends and family. Like many
people, I read the letter that he wrote,
and it is
apologizing for what he's done. It's
sort of a goodbye letter to people that
he loves.
It is imagining at times a Q&A where he
imagines criticism and then he imagines
what he would say in response to that
criticism about his actions.
Do we have any information about what
radicalized this man that made him go
from being angry and aggrieved to
actually picking up weapons, traveling
across the country, and attempting to
assassinate the president? Not yet. You
know, the FBI is combing through his
online presence, interviewing his family
and friends. So far, the online
presence, the online postings suggest
that he was a liberal-minded person who
had liberal political views and was very
unhappy and upset and angry
about things the Trump administration
was doing. That seems to be a driving
factor for him.
But in terms of how did he get to that
point, that's something that the FBI is
still unpacking. Can you just explain,
Devlin, why is that piece of writing
relevant to the charges that we saw
today? Well, it's super relevant to what
prosecutors will have to ultimately
prove in court, which is the mindset of
someone and the aims and goals of
someone who was tackled and and you
know, taken down, you know, very early
in his attempted attack. For
prosecutors, helps explain what his
actual target was, what his targets
were. That's why this note to his family
is so important because he makes pretty
clear without ever really saying Trump's
name in the writing that Trump is the
one he is most angry at. Trump is the
one he is hoping to get to. Because
presumably they would not have been able
to charge him with attempting to
assassinate the president if they did
not know what his motivation was because
he did not actually get close enough to
the president to attempt any kind of
assassination. Do I have that right?
Right.
You mentioned earlier that the suspect
was from California. I'm sure by now a
lot of people are aware that he traveled
from California to try to carry out the
shooting in DC.
What do we know about what and how he
planned?
So, we know that he bought the two
weapons involved, a pump-action shotgun
and a .38 caliber pistol
in recent years. He bought those in
California and he traveled with them
when he came to Washington.
That doesn't mean that he's been
planning to do this from the moment he
bought those weapons. It just means that
he bought the weapons several years ago.
Right. And
in early March, the president announces
that he will go to this dinner. It's
called the White House Correspondents
Association Dinner. It is a big
production in the nation's capital. They
do it every year around this time, and
this president hasn't typically gone to
it.
>> Mhm. So, in some sense, it was a bigger
deal this year because Trump had decided
to go. Mhm. Prosecutors say in the
beginning of April, the suspect starts
making his travel plans to go to
Washington. And so, in late April, he
gets on a train from Los Angeles, and
that goes to Chicago.
Once he gets to Chicago, he buys a
ticket to Washington DC.
He arrives in Washington DC
on Friday and checks into the hotel, the
Washington Hilton. That's the same hotel
where this big gala dinner is going to
be held.
>> Right.
Then on Saturday night, the night of the
event, the dinner gala proper begins at
around 8:00.
Around 8:30,
there's a security camera footage that
shows the suspect racing, just sprinting
all out through the first security
checkpoint.
And you can sort of see the shotgun in
his hand. You can't really see the the
handgun or the knives
that agents say they later took off of
him, but he races through that
checkpoint and out of the frame of the
video. Law enforcement officials say
that the part you can't see that happens
right after that is that one of those
agents turns and fires five shots at the
suspect.
And none of those shots actually hit
him, but he does fall to the ground and
is quickly tackled and disarmed.
Law enforcement officials also say that
the same agent who fired
also gets struck by a round in his
protective vest. The vest protects him
and he's not badly injured, but that
agent does take a bullet in the vest.
Some of what unfolds next is actually
quite similar to other security scares.
People hear what they think are
gunshots. They're not sure what's
happening. They're not sure where the
danger is, but they're told to to get
down. Essentially, like just get down,
you know, lower than your table. So, if
there is a gunman, he can't see you.
And that's what a lot of people in the
ballroom are doing in that moment. And,
you know, it's basically 90 120 seconds
of of real terror because no one really
knows what the danger is or what
direction it's coming from.
But at the same time, you've got Secret
Service agents outside the ballroom
dealing with the suspect on the floor
above, and you've got Secret Service
agents on the floor of the ballroom
essentially doing their best to seal off
and make sure no one goes in or out of
the ballroom in that moment to keep the
people inside the room safe.
And you've got the president's security
detail and the vice president's security
detail moving them as quickly as they
can off the dais to get them out of
harm's way. Right. So, once it's clear
that no one has been killed in this
incident, no one has been seriously
injured in this incident,
it becomes more of a question of, "Okay,
how does this keep happening?" This is
at least the third time someone has
tried to kill President Trump in one
form or another.
And so, it raises a whole bunch of
questions about the security at the
event
>> [music]
>> and, you know, preparation for the
event.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> Devlin, before the break, you mentioned
that a lot of questions have emerged
about the security around this event.
And I have seen a bunch of different
reports essentially criticizing what
happened as a security failure. Just the
fact that an armed gunman could get as
far as he did. He said in his letter how
unimpressed he was with security at the
hotel. What do you make of all of that
criticism?
I mean, look, some of it is a very
natural human reaction, right, to the
horror and surprise
that someone did this at all.
That part I think is perfectly
understandable and it's always worth
asking questions, you know. I cover law
enforcement, that's sort of what I do
every day.
I think here though, there's a big
difference between, for example, the
assassination attempt against Donald
Trump in Butler, Pennsylvania in 2024
and what happened here because
I think there was a clear security
failure in Butler where you had a
rooftop with a sightline toward the
candidate that was not protected, that
was not guarded. I think most security
experts would tell you that's an obvious
thing that needs to be guarded. Right.
Here the situation I think is quite
different in that
this person tried to essentially bum
rush a fancy black-tie gala.
He made it a matter of steps past the
initial security screening, but he never
even got onto the floor where the event
was happening. Mhm. He was taken down
and tackled before he could even get to
the stairs that led to that floor.
So, in talking to former Secret Service
and talking to other security experts,
a lot of folks have said to me, "Look,
if the question is
what do you do to prevent this, this is
what the perimeter is for. The perimeter
is designed to deal with this issue
before you're close to the event itself,
and that's what happened here."
I do think that you're going to see
though a number of conversations
and debates about, "Well, maybe this
hotel is not the best place to hold
these events anymore because you do have
a functioning hotel
right on top of a large ballroom."
A lot of the questions and concerns I've
seen raised about what happened on
Saturday
really sort of center on the idea that
the hotel itself wasn't safe. That's
certainly what the suspect was pointing
out in what he wrote. Well, exactly. And
that's what he seemed to really focus on
in this letter he sent to family and
friends. He seemed to think the security
was terrible and the security didn't
really police the lobby, didn't really
police the guests. He has a sort of
simplistic understanding of all the
security measures around him
and doesn't quite grasp that the
security he observes Friday night and
Saturday morning is not the same
security that is in place by Saturday
night.
And I think
a lot of people don't necessarily
understand all of the multi-layered
things that go into securing an event
like that. And
strangely enough, the gunman was one of
the people who didn't understand all the
layers that go into that.
Can you tell us a little bit about what
goes into securing an event like this?
Like you had mentioned earlier that the
security worked essentially the way that
it was supposed to. I'm curious kind of
what you mean by that.
>> Right. So, the thing to keep in mind is
the goal of the security for this event
was not to secure the entire hotel. Mhm.
>> And I think that's where some of the
disagreements come, which is like, well,
maybe should it be? Should, for example,
the security perimeter be pushed out
essentially outside the building itself
so that you've already gone past
magnetometers, for example, before you
get into the building at all. But that's
not how this hotel is designed, and
that's not how this ballroom space is
designed. I [snorts] spoke to security
experts who said, "Look, if you push the
perimeter out further and further,
that's not necessarily an improvement
because the actual thing you're trying
to protect is not the hotel. The actual
thing you're trying to protect is the
gathering of all of these senior
government officials." To put it another
way, it's not Secret Service's job to
protect the lobby of hotel. Absolutely.
I will say there is one, I think,
important security question here that
hasn't really been answered and might
change our understanding of the security
of for this event. And that is
did law enforcement, whether you're
talking about Secret Service or FBI or
California police,
did law enforcement agents, before all
this happened, have any understanding
that this person might be a threat to
the president?
And we don't really, I think, have a
clear answer to that yet.
But if the answer is yes, then why
weren't tripwires telling investigators
that this person was coming.
But that's a big if, right? We don't
know the answer to that yet.
And do you think Devlin that we will get
clarity about that? Do you have any
indication somebody is like working on
getting the public an answer? Is there
an investigation into what other law
enforcement agencies may have known?
Right, it's an obvious question. We're
certainly trying to get that answer
ourselves. I'm sure others are as well.
I'm sure Congress is trying to get that
answer. And to be clear, sometimes it
takes a while for the law enforcement
agencies to do a full scrub of all of
their files and make sure of what they
were told in the past about a particular
person. It's not something as simple as
just punching a name into the government
agency equivalent of Google and just
spitting out a name and maybe a file or
two. It takes a bit of effort and time
to make sure that there isn't anything
anywhere in the system.
I don't think I can recall a president /
presidential candidate just to be really
precise about our language here
who has had this many attempts on their
life in such a short amount of time. We
have seen, in addition to this, attacks
on politicians in Minneapolis and
Israeli embassy staffers in DC, just to
name a couple examples of why I think it
feels to a lot of people like we're
living in this age of heightened
political violence.
And Devlin, just given what you cover,
your experience, I just wonder if this
is how you also see it and what you make
of this.
So, it's a great question.
One thing is definitely increased and
that is
the number of threats just floating
around the internet, the number of
threats that go after not just
politicians, but for example, judges and
schools and hospitals and all manner of
American public life have a much larger
increase in just threats being thrown
around.
That is definitely increased. There's
data that show that's increased.
I think that is a problem for law
enforcement because
all of the agencies that are designed to
protect all these people, whether it's
local cops, federal marshals, FBI
agents, and Secret Service agents,
they are having to dig through more
information. There's sort of a sea of
hostility out there online, a sea of
angry, threatening
language
that makes it harder and more
time-consuming to figure out who is
really dangerous and who is just sort of
a keyboard commando.
So, that's one challenge.
And to the question of is there more
political violence in America? I think
it depends on how you measure. If your
measurement is
assassination attempts against a sitting
president or a presidential candidate, I
think you have to say the last few years
would argue the answer is yes.
If the question is political violence in
all its forms, I think that becomes a
much harder question to answer because
there has always been a degree of
political violence in this country. It's
not like
there's some golden age
prior to this of no political violence
in this country. And I think part of the
answer lies in
what types of political violence do you
count? I actually have that exact
question cuz as you're speaking, I'm
wondering whether you would count
somebody who goes into a school having
written a thousand words about a
political grievance and commits a mass
act of violence. Would that be
considered political violence even if
the targets are not themselves
politicians, for example, or elected
officials? Right. I mean, most of the
time when we talk about political
violence, we talk about violence that is
motivated by politics. And so, in that
scenario, the victim isn't, you know, a
quote-unquote political victim, but the
act is carried out in the name of a
political issue. I think most people
would consider that to be political
violence. Mhm. So, if you look at
political violence in terms of the
motivation, and if you look at political
violence in terms of who is affected by
it,
a lot of the people in that ballroom on
Saturday night did not grow up with
school lockdown drills. Some of them
did, but a lot of them didn't.
I think younger Americans, frankly, have
a little more experience than older
Americans
with that type of incident, that type of
fear.
And it may be that part of what happened
on Saturday is more and more of that
type of danger, more and more of that
type of panicked response
is finding its way not just into our
schools or hospitals or other public
places,
but into even the most high-profile
powerful gatherings of American
government officials.
How does law enforcement deal with all
of that? And
are we in an age where it is worth
contemplating whether the president of
the United States
can actually be safe in a public event
like this?
So, as part of this larger debate about
how to keep the president safe, how to
keep senior officials safe,
the president and his senior advisers
are all arguing that this incident only
shows how badly they need to finish
construction of the White House
ballroom. This is a larger fight that,
you know, has been going on for months
about whether this is really necessary
or proper and whether the president can
do it on his own without congressional
approval. A judge has said no,
but that legal fight is still going on.
And what you've seen since Saturday's
event is both the president and his
senior aides arguing very forcefully
that this is exactly the kind of thing
that the ballroom would prevent from
happening or make more difficult to
happen. Right.
>> But I think the challenge for law
enforcement is really two things. One,
you have to keep certainly the president
safe and senior government officials
safe.
Events [snorts] like Saturday show you
how difficult that can be and that it
may be becoming more difficult to keep
them safe.
But I also think part of the challenge
here for law enforcement is making the
public feel like the president is safe,
making the public feel that senior
government officials are safe.
And if a guy with a shotgun can just
sort of storm a security checkpoint and
cause a great deal of panic and fear, in
that sense it may be becoming harder and
harder for law enforcement to prevent
that kind of incident.
And [music]
I think one of the challenges here for
the government and for the public is
what are you willing to do or not do to
be as secure as possible.
Where do you draw the line between
public life and government having
events, [music]
you know, this was a very secure event
in many, many ways,
but I think a lot of the people walked
out of that ballroom feeling more afraid
[music] and more in danger than they'd
ever felt in their lives.
>> [music]
>> Devlin Barrett, thank you so much.
Thanks for [music] having me.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
President Trump and First Lady Melania
Trump [music] demanded that ABC pull
comedian Jimmy Kimmel from its airwaves
over a bit that he did about the
president [music] and the first lady
that was delivered days before the
attempted shooting at the White House
Correspondents Dinner. [music]
First Lady Melania is here. In the bit,
Kimmel, who has a long history of
sparring [music] with the president, had
imagined himself as the MC at the
dinner. Look at more so beautiful. Mrs.
Trump, you have a glow like an expectant
[music] widow.
The comments come months after ABC
temporarily pulled Kimmel's late-night
show after a conservative uproar over
the way that he described the politics
of the man accused of shooting [music]
the right-wing activist Charlie Kirk.
And President Trump has told advisers he
is not [music] satisfied with Iran's
latest proposal to reopen the Strait of
Hormuz and end the war.
The proposal also called on the United
States [music] to end its naval
blockade, but would have set aside
questions about what to do with Iran's
nuclear program. Iran has [music]
repeatedly rejected American proposals
to suspend its nuclear program and hand
over its stockpile of highly enriched
[music] uranium.
>> [music]
>> Today's episode was produced by Diana
Wynn, Mary Wilson with help from Mood
Seiki. [music]
It was edited by Devon Taylor, Lisa
Tobin, and Michael Benois. [music]
Contains music by Sofia Landman and Dan
Powell. Our theme music [music] is by
Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Chris
Wood.
>> [music]
[music]
>> That's it for The Daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.